---
title: Using theory in my teaching (option 1)
author: Thomas Torsney-Weir (849707)
bibliography: writeup.bib
...

It took me almost 40 years of my life but I have gotten more facile at using
different philosophical models of thought. I found that if I apply an idea to a
number of different models then I can reflect better on the different aspects
of it. For example, I was better able to understand some of the ethical
concerns of machine learning by using a systems thinking[@meadows:2008] model.

My hope with learning theory is that it would help me think better about
teaching.  I first got interested in pedagogical theory for two reasons. The
first reason is to better understand the effectiveness of various teaching
methods and when they should be applied. My hope is that this will minimize
experimentation in live lectures. I hesitate to affect the learning process
just to try a new idea.  The other reason I am interested in pedagogical theory
is because I want to integrate it into my research. My research field is
visualization. One of the goals of visualization is to enhance knowledge
through interaction with data. To me, this sounds very similar to a teaching
scenario. In this case, the visualization system is the "teacher" and is
"teaching" facts about a dataset. This can be used to evaluate the
effectiveness of visualization systems. 

I find that the theories of learning and philosophy of knowledege lead to a
useful list of ideas to try in my teaching. However, I find the underlying
philosophies difficult to work with. I heard about a new style of teaching,
founded in learning theory, but found that my results were very different from
those in the research papers.  Originally, I thought that this was only due to
positive publication bias in scientific publication. After learning more about
the theory of teaching I wonder if these teaching methods I have found are
using different fundamental assumptions than mine, contributing to a different
practical effect in the classroom.

I was most surprised by Malcom's ideas[@Malcolm:1952] about knowledge and
belief.  The most striking aspect of his argument is drawing a binary
distinction between knowledge and belief. He focuses on factual observable
knowledge in the paper.  Furthermore, he argues that truth, in the form of
knowledge, can be found through Karl Popper's ideas about falsifiability[@Henry:2011].
I am not sure how useful this is for education though. First of all, many of
the things we are teaching are abstract concepts. It is not possible to observe
them in a way that we can move them from "belief" to "knowledge." The idea of
falsibiability is very nice from a mathematical, theoretic point of view but
has issues in practice. There are a number of facts in the real world,
especially in science, that are strongly confirmed but may be incorrect.
Furthermore, there are a number of truths that cannot be "proven" in the
mathematical sense[@hofstadter:1979].  Popper's ideas of falsifiability
seems too idylistic in this case.

My personal view on knowledge is much closer to Bacon's ideas on degrees of
belief[@Henry:2011]. Namely, all knowledge has varying degrees of belief. Very
few things are purely true or false. Confirmatory examples of a theory increase
the degree of belief and contradictory examples lower it. Theories with a high
confidence are suspected to be true.  In Malcom's framework this would mean
that everything is a belief.  However, it seems that students --- at least my
students --- prefer learning distinct facts rather than abstract concepts.

To the casual observer, much of the application of pedagogic theory seems to be
built around transferring items of knowledge to students. Courses of study are
divided into learning objectives and, as a lecturer, these are to be taught,
developed, and tested.
This does seem to
fly in the face of the stated theory of learning in adult education (see, for
example, [@Knowles:2012]). As Knowles states, "Authoritative teaching,
examinations which preclude original thinking, rigid pedagogical formulae ---
all these have no place in adult education." The idea that education is based
on purely on transferral of knowledge is much closer to the education of
children. I always wondered whether this is a fundamental belief amongst the
researchers developing practical applications of pedagogical theory or just an
artifact that this is easier to test in a robust way. Consequently, these
methods have been difficult to integrate since they are fundamentally opposed
to my way of thinking. 

I think this is another factor for which I need to consider when reading about
new ideas to integrate into my teaching. Going forward, I need to take into 
account if the focus on "knowledge" is piecewise facts or concepts with degrees
of belief. If the teaching method is based around communication discrete pieces
of knowledge then I may need to modify it quite heavily before integrating it
into practice. 
My next step is to find resources with practical examples of teaching
concepts and performance measurement founded in degrees of belief. 

An area that I find lacking in pedagogy so far is advice on how to slowly
integrate new methods into my own practice. Experiments are costly, both for
the students and for myself. Introducing a completely new method of teaching
for a few lectures may be very jarring for the students. Students get used to a
certain pattern of lecture. They may not learn certain key concepts introduced
during this time. It is also expensive for myself in terms of time in
converting concepts to a new framework and preparing a new style of lecture.

The first stop in my exploration is to investigate
constructivism[@brunner:2009] more. Its focus on learning concepts rather than
individual facts is very appealing. In addition, I like the idea of the inquiry
method to teaching. There are a number of similiarities to the idea of building
belief in something through examples. Going forward, I want to look more into



# References


