---
title: Reflections on survival skills
author: Thomas Torsney-Weir
...


As an educator, it is important to be oneself. My personal style is casual and
interactive. I feel that it is my responsibility to keep students' interest in
the lectures. The lecture should be worthwhile for them to attend despite
distractions such as phones and sunny days.  

I was interested in the survival skills patch because the stated goal is "to
raise participants' awareness of techniques and approaches." I thought I would
learn some practical tips for preparing lectures given a limited time budget. I
do enjoy teaching and learning about new ways to teach, but I feel that I could
be much more efficient with my time before, during, and after my lectures.  I
found that while the content of the patch itself was not directly transferable
to my teaching, during the patch I am encouraged to look further into solutions
that may work better for me.

I will reflect on this using Borton's model of reflection. This breaks the
reflective process down into three parts: what, so what, and now what. The
"What" phase describes the event or task that prompted the reflection. "So
what" is the analysis of the event. Finally, "now what" is where one reflects
on possible improvements or solutions. I found this model a bit cumbersome. I
usually think about things in terms of a two stage model: "problem/solution."
The solution part has pretty clear ties to the "now what" stage of Borton's
model. However, Borton's "what" and "so what" are generally intermixed within
the problem description. I am still not convinced this needs to be extracted
separately but it was an interesting exercise nonetheless. 

# What?

Before my lectures involves how to plan efficiently. During the lecture I feel
that I go on many tangents that, while engaging, take away from retention of
knowledge. After the lecture, how do I encourage students to practice lesson
content? For example, I struggle with ways to convince struggling students to
come to office hours.

In general, I found the survival skills patch helpful with recommendations to
understand class size and student motivation.  The possibility of having a
review quiz at the beginning of every lecture and/or a review session at the
end is an interesting idea and I'd like to think of how I can incorporate it
into my personal teaching style. During the discussions, I found it very
surprising how much quizzing some lecturers do!

However, I feel that while the patch content was engaging during the lecture,
afterwards I struggle to come up with actionable ideas that I can use in my
lectures.  I would have appreciated less breaking out into small groups to
discuss student issues and more discussion of practical examples. I also thought
that the planning and presentation preparation recommendations were a little 
too general to incorporate directly into my practice.

# So what?

I've gained a lot of insight into other teaching methods and my own
pedagogical approach through listening to various podcasts, especially "the
teaching in higher-ed podcast."[cite] I find it hard to see myself directly using the
methods discussed there or in the patch in my own lectures. I am particularly
interested in the idea of the flipped classroom[cite]. However, I am unsure how
to encourage the students to prepare at home. If they do not do the preparation
for the lecture in the flipped classroom then they will be lost during the 
in-class exercises. 

I am not convinced that more control enhances learning or engagement. Tests and
quizzes do give a metric for if the students have learned the basic concepts
but I fell that rote memorization is at odds with creativity. What I would
really appreciate is a way to build measurement of synthesizing knowledge[cite]
into my lesson plan. Currently this is done by recalling previous lecture's
concepts during a lecture but I feel that this does not help the students who
are struggling to catch up. 

Teaching Computer Science in many ways is similar to teaching an artistic
discipline more than some other disciplines. For example, one can memorize
colour theory but it requires multiple practical applications to have the
student really understand the theory on a deep level that then will propel the
leaps of imagination.  This is true in computer science as well. For example,
learning how to enter data into and out of a database is an important skill
that students can use to do a research project or get a job later. However,
technology is constantly changing. If students just memorize the current
database technology or programming language then the world will pass them by in
a few years.  The theory behind these technologies does not change as fast,
however.  Understanding the (usually mathematical) theory behind the
technologies we use makes students more creative and adaptable.

This concept was also difficult to deliver during my microteaching exercise.
It was not clear to me how to distill a 1.5 hour class where I wanted 
feedback on how to better tie theory and practice together. Five minutes is
enough time to get feedback on presentation style but not how the structure
contributes to learning. I think it would have been better to start with a 
simpler concept, maybe from an earlier year, which would show the two pieces
(math and implementation). 

It seems to me, though, that the ideas expressed in this patch are structured
around a model of factual learning and categorization of information. They also
seem to assume a large time investment for preparing lectures and modules.  The
lesson planning and presentation structure recommendations given in the patch
reflect this idea. For example, preparing a lecture from scratch rather than
using one from the previous coordinator would take almost a week between
reading the source material, understanding the important points, developing
examples, and structuring the lecture. This amount of time investment is simply
not available to me at the moment. I would really have appreciated some advice
on quickly adapting previous lectures.

Furthermore, a lot of attention is put on The idea of the beginning, middle,
and end of the lecture seems to be at odds with presentation style
recommendations[cite zen and one other]. For example, students will be paying
the most attention at the beginning of the lecture[cite] so why not teach the
important summary concepts at the beginning of the lecture and then go into less
and less important things as the lecture goes on? I have heard this referred to
as "newspaper style" since most people only read the first few paragraphs of a
newspaper article, the most important information is put first.  Lectures are
not in general in this format and some tips on how to adapt old lectures
quickly to my own style would have been very helpful. 

# Now what?

I believe that effective learning is to both be oneself as an educator and to
unlock the studentâ€™s individual potential and understanding of the subject.  It
would be valuable to continue to explore various teaching methods as not every
student can be fit into a box. I enjoy teaching and want to find additional
resources to better serve my students, my department and my university.

Going forward, I do intend to try and incorporate some more quizzes into my
lectures. I want to look up some advice on how to test for knowledge synthesis
rather than memorization. My first place to look will be the e-learning
community. There are also some examples of how to measure understanding within
the visualization community[refs]. 

I also have a current reading list to go through. My hope is that these books
will have some practical tips to address preparing lectures quickly and how
to link theory to practice. The main book in this set is "The education of a
graphical designer"[cite]. Since graphic design also incorporates the ideas of
integrating theory and practice I hope that the lessons in the book will be
transferable to my field. I also want to understand more about the goal of
what is learning so I can better design my lectures. Current books in this 
direction are "How humans learn"[cite] and "Small teaching" [cite].

My hope is that these different sources will give me insight into how I can 
better plan and deliver my lectures. The microteaching idea itself is a good
one. Maybe I can try to plan small examples and deliver them to get rapid
feedback[cite]. Incorporating both theoretical ideas from books such as
"How humans learn" with practical ideas from "The education of a graphical
designer" will help me prepare and deliver the lectures in an engaging way
while understand the reasons behind my decision.

