---
title: Reflections on group work
author: Thomas Torsney-Weir (849707)
bibliography: writeup.bib
---

From my student days, I remember being fairly neutral to being given a group
work assignment. They were nice because it was a social opportunity and we
could implement a larger piece of software. On the other hand, I never felt
like I learned more than a solo assignment. Plus, the experience of working in
a group always felt artificial. Consequently, I have not incorporated this much
into lectures.  I hoped that the group work module and related literature would
give me some new ideas for group work. However, the group project and literature
did not yield many new insights. 

One of the things I would have found very helpful in the literature is a bit
more critical discussion of experiences implementing group work. I understand
that it's difficult to publish negative scientific studies but it would be
invaluable for those implementing group work. The issues I have seen are fairly
cursory[@michaelsen:1997]. I would have also liked a bit more discussion of
taxonomy. The idea of group work is quite broad. There are everything from
pair, in-class discussions to large term projects with 5-10 people. I have not
seen this organized into some sort of review. Papers seem to be written as a
single case study without much abstraction to the larger taxonomy around group
work. This makes it hard to understand how transferrable techniques will be to
my own teaching without trying it myself. This is not always easy when teaching
due to time constraints and addressing the needs of the students.

I had hoped my experiences with the group work assignment would help me to
understand how to effectively use group work in my own classes. However, the
experience was not very novel. The assignment focused on developing guidelines
that should be followed in a group work situation. The goals and organization
of the group were very open-ended. The role and responsibilities were left up
to the group itself. The experience was similar to previous group projects I
have done in the past. One or two people emerge as strong leaders and manage
the project while the others helped with the workload. It worked quite well,
but without any real guidance to try something new I believe we all reverted
back to what we had learned during our previous studies. 

I realized while exploring literature for guidelines that guidelines are not
really what makes group projects an effective learning environment. I think it
has more to do with the assignment structure itself.  While coming up with
guidelines, I tried to look into literature to see how group projects could be
effectively structured in Computer Science. I found a number of papers on the
topic. Many of them divided the students into roles similar to that in a
software development company[@hedin:2005]. For example, there would be a lead
architect, developer, designer, and so on. This was interesting but the papers
(like many of these case studies) did not have an effective comparison so it
was difficult to understand if this change to the coursework enhanced learning.

Before taking this patch, I was quite skeptical of using group work as a
primary means of assessment. I hoped this patch would open my eyes to new ideas
and methods. However, the patch was mostly about ideas and experiences I
already had so was not as helpful as it could have been. I will keep looking in
the literature for some ideas though!



